Text generation
===============

Learn how to prompt a model to generate text.

With the OpenAI API, you can use a [large language model](/docs/models) to generate text from a prompt, as you might using [ChatGPT](https://chatgpt.com). Models can generate almost any kind of text response—like code, mathematical equations, structured JSON data, or human-like prose.

Here's a simple example using the [Responses API](/docs/api-reference/responses).

Generate text from a simple prompt

```javascript
import OpenAI from "openai";
const client = new OpenAI();

const response = await client.responses.create({
    model: "gpt-4.1",
    input: "Write a one-sentence bedtime story about a unicorn."
});

console.log(response.output_text);
```

```python
from openai import OpenAI
client = OpenAI()

response = client.responses.create(
    model="gpt-4.1",
    input="Write a one-sentence bedtime story about a unicorn."
)

print(response.output_text)
```

```bash
curl "https://api.openai.com/v1/responses" \
    -H "Content-Type: application/json" \
    -H "Authorization: Bearer $OPENAI_API_KEY" \
    -d '{
        "model": "gpt-4.1",
        "input": "Write a one-sentence bedtime story about a unicorn."
    }'
```

An array of content generated by the model is in the `output` property of the response. In this simple example, we have just one output which looks like this:

```json
[
    {
        "id": "msg_67b73f697ba4819183a15cc17d011509",
        "type": "message",
        "role": "assistant",
        "content": [
            {
                "type": "output_text",
                "text": "Under the soft glow of the moon, Luna the unicorn danced through fields of twinkling stardust, leaving trails of dreams for every child asleep.",
                "annotations": []
            }
        ]
    }
]
```

**The `output` array often has more than one item in it!** It can contain tool calls, data about reasoning tokens generated by [reasoning models](/docs/guides/reasoning), and other items. It is not safe to assume that the model's text output is present at `output[0].content[0].text`.

Some of our [official SDKs](/docs/libraries) include an `output_text` property on model responses for convenience, which aggregates all text outputs from the model into a single string. This may be useful as a shortcut to access text output from the model.

In addition to plain text, you can also have the model return structured data in JSON format - this feature is called [**Structured Outputs**](/docs/guides/structured-outputs).

Choosing a model
----------------

A key choice to make when generating content through the API is which model you want to use - the `model` parameter of the code samples above. [You can find a full listing of available models here](/docs/models). Here are a few factors to consider when choosing a model for text generation.

*   **[Reasoning models](/docs/guides/reasoning)** generate an internal chain of thought to analyze the input prompt, and excel at understanding complex tasks and multi-step planning. They are also generally slower and more expensive to use than GPT models.
*   **GPT models** are fast, cost-efficient, and highly intelligent, but benefit from more explicit instructions around how to accomplish tasks.
*   **Large and small (mini or nano) models** offer trade-offs for speed, cost, and intelligence. Large models are more effective at understanding prompts and solving problems across domains, while small models are generally faster and cheaper to use.

When in doubt, [`gpt-4.1`](/docs/models/gpt-4.1) offers a solid combination of intelligence, speed, and cost effectiveness.

Prompt engineering
------------------

Prompting is a mix of art and science. Learn about prompting, including how to [engineer better prompts](/docs/guides/prompt-engineering) and [optimize your prompts for caching](/docs/guides/prompt-caching) for more efficient reuse, in the [prompting docs](/docs/guides/prompting).

Next steps
----------

Now that you known the basics of text inputs and outputs, you might want to check out one of these resources next.

[

Build a prompt in the Playground

Use the Playground to develop and iterate on prompts.

](/chat/edit)[

Generate JSON data with Structured Outputs

Ensure JSON data emitted from a model conforms to a JSON schema.

](/docs/guides/structured-outputs)[

Full API reference

Check out all the options for text generation in the API reference.

](/docs/api-reference/responses)

Was this page useful?